This is session 112,
Writing Threaded Apps for Mac OS X.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilchez.
I'm the hardware evangelist
in Developer Relations.
Good morning.
As we all know, Mac OS X is a fully
threaded operating system.
For that reason,
you should be writing apps
to take advantage of that.
We ship dual processor systems as well.
So writing a fully optimized
application will take advantage
of that second processor.
I just want to show you
a couple examples of,
you know,
an application taking advantage of that
second processor and an application not.
So the first example is
a simple QuickTime movie.
We'll go ahead and play
all the movies here.
Can I get the demo screen?
Demo two.
Thank you.
So I'll just run that application.
Let's run Thread Viewer,
take a look at what's going
Video is not important.
But what I want to show you as an example
is clicking back to the QuickTime movie,
holding down the menu,
you'll see another thread actually
get started there for the menu,
but the movie is still playing.
Going to another application.
This is just showing a molecule rotating.
Again,
we'll go ahead and attach Thread Viewer.
And you can also see the
processor is getting pinged there.
So you have a single thread.
What happens when you
hold down the menu button?
Drawing stops.
That second thread actually
does not get created.
What gets created is actually
the thread for the menu system,
which is the OS,
actually taking advantage of that.
So for your application,
what you want to do is have the user
interface give the user the feedback
that things can still be occurring.
By being able to drop down that menu,
perform some actions,
and still have the window being
drawn is a very huge advantage,
particularly when you
have dual processors.
And for applications like this,
a scientific application,
that comes in really handy.
Go back to slides, please.
So I want to bring up Matt Watson,
Core and Technologies Engineer,
who will present to you the
information today on threading,
how to thread your applications,
and give you all the new features that
we've added to Jaguar for threading.
Thank you.
Thanks, Mark.
I'm Matt Watson.
I work in the
Core Technologies Group at Apple.
I've been at Apple about ten years now,
mostly working on the BSD,
Darwin layer and the threads
implementation down there.
Today I'll talk to you a little bit
about writing multithreaded apps in OS X,
some of the APIs we provide,
the different API layers,
things you need to know,
what makes our platform a little
different from other platforms.
So why do you want to use
threads in your application?
The first one is something
that Mark mentioned,
the customer expectation.
If they spend a bunch of money
on a dual processor system,
they're going to want to get the
benefit of that second processor.
As he showed you,
there's applications that can
take advantage of the second
processor fairly easily,
but you can also write an application
that's just a port from an existing
classic app that will just block the API,
excuse me, block the UI unexpectedly.
So you really want to design your
application to take advantage of
all the features of the system.
Scalability.
As you know,
Mac OS X is a fully preemptive,
multi-threaded operating system.
So when you use an API that lets you
take advantage of multiple threads,
if you happen to be running that
application on a dual processor system,
you can take advantage
of that second processor,
sometimes without even you knowing it.
Preemption.
Because the way the system
slices time between threads on
a kind of a round-robin basis,
your application, if it's multithreaded,
will get more than another
application's share of that time slice.
There's some APIs in the system that are
synchronous that you really can't avoid.
So, for instance,
hostname lookups classically have
been these blocking APIs where you
just have to wait for the response
to come back from the network.
And if you use a second thread,
that means your application can go and
continue and do other things while you're
waiting for that response to come back.
Polling.
As Avi mentioned in the keynote,
polling is bad.
You really don't want to have your
application sitting there iterating
on waiting for an event to occur.
So one way to avoid that might be to
create a second thread that just waits
for the event and then notifies the
main thread when that event occurs.
Threads are really,
really good for data-driven tasks.
And in a dual processor system,
you can really get a huge performance
boost if the way your application
is designed is such that the
data can be partitioned across
multiple threads and each processor
can just crank on the data.
And I'll show you a
little example of that.
This is a slide we've shown before.
For a multiprocessor system,
the scaling you can get,
the numbers at the end
of the slide are the,
the multipliers for the benefit
for the second processor.
Now, one thing you might notice in this,
these are basically Photoshop filters
that have been optimized
for a dual processor system.
The second bar there shows
you a 2.3x improvement.
Well, that sounds kind of strange.
How can you get more than 2x
when you have two processors?
Well, the,
the trick is you get a second cache
when you get that second processor.
So if your application was using
data that didn't quite fit in the
primary cache of one processor and
you split that task up into two tasks,
and both of those tasks now fit
into the caches of both processors,
now you get a little bit of benefit
where you're not calling into main
memory all the time to get your data.
There are some cases where you
might want to avoid threads.
While it sounds attractive,
you still have to be careful
when you're using threads.
There's some added complexity.
For instance,
if you're porting an application
that was single threaded and you
want to add multiple threads to it,
you have to be careful of
the global data in the task.
You're going to have to add a locking
mechanism if you want multiple
threads to access that global data,
and that might introduce some complexity
that you'll just have to manage.
Threading adds a little bit
of overhead to an application
that you have to be aware of.
There's kernel resources
associated with that.
There's context switching
So when you're adding threads,
you have to decide whether the
benefits of the extra thread
are worth it for your task.
In a lot of cases,
there may be other options that are
better suited for what you're doing,
like timers.
If you just want to have something
that periodically puts up a little
display or increments timers,
on the screen, that might be perfect
for a clock display.
You might want to use a timer rather
than a dedicated thread sitting
there just firing every second.
Given that a lot of applications,
a GUI application will have
an event loop that's already
handling events fairly constantly,
you can plug into that pretty easily.
If you find that you're creating
hundreds of threads in your application,
you might want to rethink
the design of that.
You really want to make sure that
your thread model follows the data,
meaning if you have data sources
coming from disk or network or the UI,
that's really the only place
that the system can take
advantage of multiple threads.
If you're creating 100 threads to
read parts of a file off the disk,
that doesn't make sense because
the file is just going to come
from the same part of the system.
anyway, so that all those threads are
gonna be serialized in effect.
A little bit about thread
overhead that I mentioned.
The way the system switches between
threads is called a context switch.
So every thread has a set of
register state and resources
that's associated with it.
And whenever the system
switches between threads,
it has to save the context that was being
used in the previous thread and restore
it when that thread comes back to life.
In the PowerPC architecture,
the floating point and vector
state is pretty expensive.
We have a lot of registers.
The vector registers are large.
So if you're heavily using
that in your threads,
you may notice that the context
switch time is going to cost you.
There's also memory footprint
associated with each thread.
Besides the actual thread structures
that are being used in the system,
every thread by default
has 512K of stack.
And that may sound pretty large,
but the memory itself is virtual,
meaning the system doesn't charge
your application that memory
until it's touching the pages.
But if you look at the address space,
you have 4GB of address space,
so half a meg of stack size is
going to get eaten up pretty quick.
There's APIs I'll talk about in a little
bit that help you reduce that stack
overhead if you know that your thread
isn't going to be using a lot of stack.
Thread creation time is also a factor.
There are APIs that
let you create threads,
let the threads exit,
but you may want to be aware
of the actual cost of that.
And if you want, you can create what's
called a thread pool,
where you just keep a set of threads kind
of on the side and just signal them to
let them know that they have work to do.
Because if you just use
the system resources,
you're creating all of these
resources over and over every
time you do a thread create.
All the APIs in Mac OS X that deal
with threads have some common concepts.
They let you create threads,
destroy threads.
They are synchronization primitives.
So depending on the API set you're using,
there's mutex locks,
there's condition variables
that can signal that events
have occurred between threads.
And every API set has the
set of thread-safe services.
And as we work on improving Mac OS X,
we try and make that set
of APIs more and more rich,
whereas you shouldn't have
to worry about which APIs are
thread-safe and which aren't.
A little bit about the
internal implementation.
As I said,
threads are the scheduling primitive.
The kernel doesn't deal with tasks
per se as a scheduling primitive.
It deals with threads.
So, as I mentioned before,
if your task has multiple threads in it,
the kernel is going to look at your task
more often through the scheduling loop.
Since the system is fully preempted,
that means a thread can get
interrupted at any time.
Now, there's some high-level APIs that
represent cooperative threads,
but underlying the system,
those cooperative threads actually get
interrupted in between instructions.
So there's no guarantee of when
that thread will get interrupted.
If you're using the cooperative API,
we're trying to encourage people
to get off of that and use the
higher-level preemptive APIs.
We use a priority-based scheduling model.
The default scheduling for a thread gives
every thread an equal priority kind of
in the middle of the priority range.
If you want to enhance that,
you can increase the
priority of a thread.
If you know that you have a
thread that's not very important,
you just want it kind of going off
in the background doing some work,
you can decrease the priority of
that thread and it won't impact
higher-level priority threads.
Another implementation detail is we
use a one-to-one threading model,
meaning we map one kernel
thread to one user-level thread.
And that's somewhat different from
other implementations that you might
have seen where there's multiplexing,
where multiple user threads
map to a kernel thread.
The main reason for this is
simplicity of the design,
and it scales a little bit
better on multiprocessor systems.
With the multiplexing implementation,
there'd have to be some signaling
to the kernel when the user-level
threads switch context.
So we don't have that
in our implementation.
Mach is the API that you may
have heard about in the kernel.
That's where the threading implementation
lives at its very lowest level.
You can inspect Mach threads and the
Mach thread attributes in a task,
but we generally recommend that you use
the higher level threading APIs instead.
The reason behind that is if
you use a low level Mach API,
you kind of subvert the
higher level API's usage.
So if you change a priority of a
Mach thread directly and the P thread
wants to get the priority also,
it might get confused.
Those priorities might get out of sync.
Mac is full symmetric multiprocessing.
It was designed from the ground
up to handle systems with
symmetric multiprocessors.
So all of the code that we use
for locking and synchronization
is designed for that use.
We have a single kernel for
uniprocessor and multiprocessor.
Basically,
that simplifies our customer support.
We have a single binary that we ship.
We have one install.
So basically,
you can take a disk that you installed
on your dual processor system and
you can install it on your Mac OS X.
Bring it over to a single processor
system and it'll work just fine.
You don't have to worry about
whether that was specifically
designed to be UP or MP.
One of the implementation details
of Mach is we have lazy floating
point and vector context save.
I mentioned this was one of the costs
of threading in the context area was
how you have this floating point and
vector state that has to be saved
and restored on context switches.
Well, Mach has a little optimization
where if your thread hasn't used
any floating point or vector state,
we know that and will lazily save
and restore that depending on only if
the thread has used those features.
The Mach scheduler is what our
scheduling system is based off of.
It came from the OSF,
the Open Software Foundation.
We've heavily modified it
since we originally got it,
and it's been tuned for the
higher layers of the system.
It uses a global run queue,
meaning that we don't have
a run queue per processor.
We have a run queue for the whole system,
and basically as threads block
and other threads become runnable,
the system will schedule it
based on the available processor.
There's a notion of an
idle processor signal,
so if a processor
happens to be not in use,
there's a signal that occurs
that lets the system know that,
okay, I can now schedule a
thread on this processor.
One of the things that's a
little bit different in Jaguar is
we've tuned the thread affinity.
Thread affinity is basically the
notion that you want a thread
to continue running on the same
processor that it's been running on.
The reason behind that
is for cache affinity,
because when you're using
a cache on the system,
you're not going to be able to
run a thread on the same processor
that it's been running on.
So if you have a cache on the system,
you don't want to have to migrate your
data kind of back and forth between
the two caches on the processor.
So in Jaguar, we try and be a lot more
aggressive about keeping threads
running on the same processor.
We don't have any high-level API for
binding threads to a specific processor,
but you'll notice if you're using
the CPU monitor app and you have
a single-threaded process running,
that thread is not going to
bounce back and forth as much
between the multiple processors.
The Mac schedule is
responsible for the preemption.
So just to reiterate,
your threads can get
interrupted at any time,
and you have to be able to react to that.
So if you're using atomic operations,
you're protected from that.
But depending on global data,
you really have to make sure that
you're using the synchronization
primitives that the Thread API provides.
I'll talk a little bit
about Pthreads now.
This is the lowest level API that we
recommend people using in the system.
It's what the Darwin thread
model is based off of.
Like I said, it's,
it's used by all the thread APIs.
So the Carbon, the Cocoa,
and the Java thread APIs all call
into the POSIX implementation.
The, the benefit of that is whenever
we make improvements to the
POSIX thread implementation,
all the other thread models
can take advantage of that.
So if we make mutexes faster,
if we make context
switching a little faster,
all these high-level thread
APIs can take advantage of that.
I call it a POSIX-like
implementation because we don't
have a conformance test suite that
we pass when we implement this API,
but when we refer to it,
we want to use the POSIX naming and
conventions because it's fairly easy
to go down to your local bookstore
and pick up a book on Pthreads
and just start using it on Darwin.
Like I said, we have a one-to-one
mock-to-Pthread implementation.
Simplifies the user-level APIs.
Simplifies debugging.
All the applications that you see would
have to be much more complex if we had
a multiplexing thread implementation.
Pthreads is, like I said,
a fairly common API.
It's easy to go find a reference for
it and pick it up fairly quickly.
There are some misuses you might
have to be aware of I'll mention in
a little bit that are fairly common
for people who are new to the API.
One thing that we currently have,
if you're looking at the CD that
you got at the conference,
we don't have any system-wide types yet.
So POSIX specifies an implementation
that provides process-wide or system-wide
mutexes and condition variables.
So process-wide means that they're
visible within the same task.
I can have a mutex that I lock
and unlock in the same task.
System-wide means multiple tasks can
put a mutex or a condition variable
in shared memory and use that.
This is pretty common on
databases or server applications,
but as of today, we don't have that yet.
Okay.
One thing to be aware of in Pthreads
is synchronization is not cheap.
You really want to make sure that
your threads are data-driven.
You want to take full advantage
of the processors in your system.
You want the threads just to
be cranking on the data and
then signal when they're done.
You don't want threads to be
sending status updates all the time.
There's other mechanisms to do that.
You can peek at the thread and
check its status if you just want
a user-level UI notification.
But if you're ping-ponging
between threads back and forth,
that's going to cost you a little bit.
By default,
the specification for Pthread says that
threads are what's called joinable,
meaning the system will worry about that
thread and keep track of it for you.
And if you really want that thread
just to go off and do its job and you
don't want to hear about it anymore,
you have to use what's called detach API,
meaning you either create the
thread detached or you can detach
the thread after it's been created.
This basically lets the system
know that you don't really care
when that thread exits anymore,
you just want it to
go off and do its job.
What you'll notice if you don't detach is
that these threads will just hang around
in the system consuming these resources
until someone joins them or cancels them.
There's a stack issue, like I said,
with threads where by default
you get a fairly large stack,
and this doesn't cost you too
much as long as your application
isn't using very many threads.
But once you get up to, you know,
a lot of threads,
the stack size actually becomes
a limitation because your virtual
address space starts to get smaller.
The API and P threads that let you
shrink your stack size will allow
you to do that at creation time.
So you specify, I only want to use 16K
of stack for my thread.
And this is probably enough for
you to do that at creation time.
But this is probably
enough for most usage.
So if you're creating threads a lot,
you might want to take a look at this.
Checking predicates is very
important in P threads.
A predicate is the global
notion of a condition that has
occurred or you're waiting for.
So you usually have a global variable,
and if you are waiting for a
condition to be signaled using
the P thread condition mechanisms,
what you do is lock a mutex,
check the global variable to see
if the condition has occurred.
And that condition is only
manipulated within that mutex.
If the condition hasn't occurred yet,
you then wait on the condition,
which simultaneously unlocks the mutex.
Now, if you don't have a predicate,
that causes some scheduling problems,
and your application will not respond
like you want because you basically
kind of cheated the system by saying,
oh, I know what I'm doing.
I'll just wait on this condition.
Well, there's race conditions
implicit in this API,
so you have to have a predicate.
And you always have to make
sure that it's checked.
Another reason is because the
condition wait implementation
can spuriously wake up.
The specification actually says
that a condition wait can wake up
with a success result even though
the condition hasn't been signaled.
And the reason behind that is
on a multiprocessor system,
it's very difficult to implement
this atomic unlock the mutex
and wait on the condition,
so they give you a little bit of leeway.
And once your condition
has been signaled,
you also get a successful wake up,
so you also have to check that predicate
every time your condition wait returns.
There's an API for canceling threads,
which basically means I would
like that thread to stop running.
And you do this from an outside thread.
The two models are deferred cancellation
and asynchronous cancellation.
Deferred cancellation is good
because it's a lot more well-defined.
You tell the thread more as a
request that you'd like it to cancel.
The thread, if it gets to a point
where it's safe to cancel,
will then exit itself,
clean up its resources, and go away.
Async cancellation,
asynchronous cancellation is
not considered very good because
you don't really know where the
thread is when it's running.
If it's not at a safe point
and you tell it to go away,
it could be holding a critical system
resource like a lock and you basically
just yank that out from underneath it.
So we discourage the use of that,
but it's part of the API specification.
A little bit more detail
on Pthread Cancel.
In Jaguar, we've added more cancellation
points besides Pthread Test Cancel.
So the system-defined cancellation points
are described in the POSIX specification.
They're kind of the common Unix
system calls like read and select,
all these things that could normally
block for an indefinite amount of time.
You want to make sure that you can wake
up a thread that's blocked in that API.
One of the common uses is Pthread
condition weight as one of these places
where you might want to cancel a thread
while it's in the middle of this API.
One of the interesting things
about a Pthread condition weight,
like I said,
it unlocks the mutex that you were
using to protect your predicate.
So when you cancel a thread,
it reacquires that mutex.
So you have to use what's called a
cleanup handler when you cancel a thread
that's blocked in a condition weight.
That cleanup handler will unlock the
mutex and let the thread exit cleanly
because you don't want to have a thread
exiting holding a mutex because that
means that no other thread in the process
will be able to acquire that again.
Another added API is Pthread at Fork.
Now, this is kind of esoteric in that
it's usually only used for library
implementations or plug-ins that
need to really worry about when the
process has forked a new child process.
The problem with this is it's very
hard to do correctly because usually
all the subsystems that are using
Pthread at Fork need to be intimately
aware of each other so that they don't
introduce any deadlock conditions.
Because if I'm depending on API such
that that API needs to acquire or release
a mutex before the process has forked,
you need to make sure that all
the at fork routines have been
registered in the proper order.
So we kind of restrict its use and
mainly provide it just to supply the API.
Another set of new additions are the
attributes on conditions and mutexes.
This was a big request from a lot
of our customers who were saying
that they were finding it difficult
to port existing applications
because we didn't provide this API.
Like I said, right now the system-wide
attributes aren't supported,
but if you look in the
pthread.h header file,
you can see the attributes
that we support.
One of the interesting ones is
the get and set stack attribute.
Now that is an addition in what's called
the single-unit specification version 3,
which is kind of an aggregate that
contains the POSIX thread specification.
This allows you to get and set
the stack size and stack location.
So if you're creating and
destroying a lot of threads,
you may want to actually pick a place
that you want the stack to start
at for that thread so the system
doesn't have to allocate stack for it.
And you can also specify
the size of the stack.
So if you know your thread is
consuming very little stack,
you can optimize that a little bit more.
Another thing that's been
added is per-thread signaling,
a very commonly requested feature.
The three APIs that are implemented
under this are PthreadKill,
PthreadSigMask, and SigWait.
PthreadKill is the mechanism that
you use to tell a thread that
you want it to be interrupted.
The thread, if it handles that signal,
will be interrupted,
do what it normally does
in a signal handler,
and then continue execution.
PthreadSigMask is the API that
specifies which signals a
thread is willing to handle.
So a common use is if an application is
multithreaded and it can get external
signals from outside the process,
you dedicate a thread with PthreadSigMask
to handle those external signals.
SIGWAIT is a mechanism that will
allow you to basically block a thread
until one of these signals occur.
So you can just dedicate that
thread to handling a signal and it
doesn't have to do any work besides
sitting in its SIGWAIT routine.
This is very helpful in porting a lot
of Unix applications like Apache 2.0
makes heavy use of per-thread signaling.
Another commonly requested
feature was read-write locks.
Pthread read-write lock will allow you
to use global state if it's commonly
read but not as frequently written,
then you can optimize
this using this API.
Our current implementation
prefers writers,
meaning that if you have multiple readers
waiting for a lock that there's one
writer on and another writer comes in,
that writer will take precedence.
The idea is that that will allow
the system to progress a little bit
faster because writers usually need
to go and make a change and continue,
whereas readers, you know,
you want to have more than a few readers
reading at a time where you only want
to have one writer writing at a time.
This is now mandatory in the
single-unit configuration.
We have a unique specification
for the threads extension,
so we decided to implement that as well.
There's a couple new mutex types.
Pthread mutex error check is very handy.
It'll allow you to determine
whether a thread would deadlock
when it attempts to lock a mutex,
or it will let you know when
a thread that unlocks a mutex
wasn't actually the mutex holder.
This functionality has been in
Puma using the debug lib system,
if you know how to do that.
There's two versions of
the system framework.
One that has some debug help in it.
If you use the DYLD image
suffix environment variable,
you can specify that you want your
program to use the debug flavor
while you're under development.
The recursive mutex is there
mostly for completeness,
but usually I've never found a
case where you couldn't design
a locking implementation that
didn't need recursive mutexes.
It's usually for people who are porting
something that depends on recursive
mutexes and you haven't quite spent
the time to reimplement that yet.
For references in Pthreads,
the man pages have
been updated in Jaguar,
so you can now use those
as a pretty good reference.
The Darwin CVS repository is where
the implementation actually lives,
so you can follow the progress.
Like I said, we'll be making some changes
since the CD that you got
before Jaguar is finished,
and you can track that in the
LibC and the XNU projects.
XNU is the kernel that has
the high-level or low-level,
depending on your perspective,
implementation of some of the primitives
that are used by the LibC project.
The Open Group has a nice
website with the single-unit
specification that we kind of model,
and if you want to go there
and get a nice bookmark there
page for the Pthreads API,
it's a fairly good reference.
And the News Group Comp Programming
Threads is where a lot of
Pthreads experts like to hang out.
I'll talk a little bit now
about the Carbon MP API.
It's one of the high-level APIs that
lives on top of the Darwin POSIX threads.
One of the notions that is a
little bit different in Carbon is
the MP tasks are what I was
referring to as threads previously.
So in Classic,
you had MP tasks that ran in
a process's address space,
and those are basically what I've
been referring to as threads.
A difference between
Classic and Mac OS X,
obviously,
is you now have separate address spaces,
so MP tasks won't be able to
communicate like they could in
Classic between multiple address spaces,
so you have to be aware of that.
Like all the thread APIs,
there's several mechanisms that
exist to coordinate MP tasks.
There's semaphores,
which are simple signaling mechanisms.
Message queues,
which allow you to create fairly
complex worker-client implementations.
There are event groups,
so you can wait for lots of
different signals to happen
using a single entry point.
There's also critical regions,
where if you have a set of code that you
only want one thread to be in at a time,
you can specify that
as a critical region.
It also provides recursive entry,
so it knows that the same thread
can enter that critical region.
The MPTask API also provides some handy
atomic increment/decrement operations.
So if you have a very common operation
like a reference count that you
want to increment or decrement,
rather than taking a full-blown lock,
changing the variable and unlock,
you can just use one of
these atomic operations.
Examples of the APIs in Mac OS X that
use the MPTask are the Synchronous
File Manager and OpenTransport.
Both take advantage of this API.
The Carbon API has a list
of thread-safe services,
and that's documented in Tech Note 2006,
if you want to take a look at that.
Next I'll talk about Cocoa Threads,
another high level thread API,
kind of a peer to the Carbon threading.
NSThread is the Cocoa Thread class.
It's very simple to use.
There's very few APIs that
you have to learn to use this.
Most threading models have the
notion of a start function.
So in Objective-C you have a start
method that your class will implement.
In NSThreads, they keep track of the
Objective-C exception model.
So when you raise an
Objective-C exception,
that raise occurs in the specific
NSThread rather than kind of
throughout the whole process.
There's an exit notification,
which is kind of like the
joining mechanism I talked about.
When a thread exits, you may just want to
know that it's gone away,
so you can register for that
notification through the normal
Cocoa notification mechanisms.
Each NS thread also has
a per-thread dictionary.
So this is kind of an extension
of the notion of per-thread data,
where a thread can have a set of data
that's just for that specific thread.
And in Cocoa,
we provide a nice little wrapper
that lets you put an object-oriented
NSDictionary on top of that
data for key value type access.
There's an AppKit extension in
NSThreads which basically is a hint
to the system that says I'm going
to be creating a background thread
that may be doing some drawing.
So if you look in the
NSApplication class,
it's called DetachedDrawingThread.
And that's, like I said,
it's basically a hint to the
system that lets it know that the
main thread may need to respond
to requests from this background
thread to do drawing operations.
Each NSThread has a separate run loop.
So you may see some interesting
behavior that you have to worry about
where if you post a notification,
it doesn't go to the full
application run loop,
the main run loop that the
event handling is occurring in.
It only goes to your thread's run loop.
So there's other mechanisms
that you can use if you want a
notification to be broadcast more
broadly outside of your thread.
You also need to start
the run loop explicitly.
So when you create a new thread
and you want that thread to
have a run loop to handle it,
you need to start the
run loop explicitly.
So if you want to handle things
like these notifications,
that run loop hasn't been running yet.
You have to kind of think about how this
thread was created and decide once you've
set up everything to go ahead and start
its run loop and let it do its thing.
There's also an auto-release pool
associated with every thread.
So as a thread is created,
the memory management that's
part of Cocoa that allows
you to auto-release objects,
meaning you can kind of
defer the deallocation of
that object to a later time.
And in an NSThread,
every thread has a pool
that's associated with it.
So when you auto-release an object,
it goes into the thread's pool.
When the thread exits,
that auto-release pool
also gets destroyed.
Some of the future things we're working
on in all of the thread APIs are
the notion of priority inheritance.
This is kind of a problem where
once you've created threads
with different priorities,
you may find that a higher priority
thread is blocked waiting for a lower
priority thread to release a lock.
But because of the scheduling behavior,
that lower priority thread
won't get to run while this
priority thread is blocked.
So an implementation that could be
designed would allow that lower priority
thread to temporarily inherit the
priority of the higher priority thread.
Now, this would allow the higher priority
thread to let the lower priority
thread release whatever resources
it was holding and continue.
System Shared Resources, like I said,
we're working on that.
It's very commonly requested
by server and database clients,
so we really want to make sure that we
provide all the APIs that they need.
Performance.
There's always room for
improvement in performance.
We're really trying to make the
threading APIs as efficient as possible.
There's been some talk about things like
implementing thread pools so that you
can have a nice high-level way to create
thread pools in the POSIX-type API.
Other things, just low-level making the
context switch faster,
making threading overall improve.
And like I said, when we make performance
improvements at the pthread level,
all the other thread layers
take advantage of that.
So if you want to follow this,
you should watch the Darwin Repository
because that's where the threading and
the kernel implementations live for the
Pthreads and the Mach implementation.
So now I'd like to bring
up Robert Bowdidge,
who works in the Developer Tools team,
and he's going to show a demo of a
multithreaded application and how to
inspect what's going on at the time.
Okay, thank you, Matt.
As Matt mentioned,
my name is Robert Bowdidge.
I am a member of the
Developer Tools Group,
where I'm responsible for the
performance tools on Mac OS X.
Now, what Matt has gone through is a
little bit of the how on threads.
He's also told us a little
of the why on threads,
about why we actually might need them.
What I'd like to do is take that
one step further and try to give you
some examples of good thread use,
to give you some examples about
how Apple has actually used
threading in its own applications.
The way that I'm going to do this is I'm
going to use a performance tool called
Thread Viewer that's on the developer CD.
How many of you have actually tried this?
That's good.
How many of you understand
what it gives out?
Good.
Sort of good.
What ThreadViewer does is it
provides a timeline visualization of
what's going on in an application.
It tends to be kind of coarse-grained,
but it's very nice for
understanding sort of overall
trends of what your app is doing.
The first app I'm going
to look at is the Finder.
Now, the Finder's actually a
really interesting example
for threading because,
first of all, it's our primary access
into the file system.
You know,
it has a direct manipulation interface,
and so we expect that when
we drag a folder around,
we want to imagine as if we're
actually dragging a folder
from one place to another.
And so the Finder must be as responsive
as possible for us to be happy.
On the other hand,
the Finder also has the problem
that it's dealing with two of the
slowest devices on the system.
It's dealing with the disk,
which when it goes out to get
accesses is going to take a
while to come back with data.
And it's dealing with the
network which is even worse
because nothing may come back.
And so the finder has to be extremely
good and has to try as hard as it can to
try to make sure that it's as responsive
as possible while dealing with these
resources that tend to be extremely slow.
So what we have at the top window
here is Thread Viewer showing
what's going on in the finder.
As you can see,
you have a timeline view going from
the distant past into the present.
And if I actually do some
activities in the finder,
We see some actions going on.
And what you see here is you see little
colored blocks on each of the horizontal
lines representing each of the threads.
The blocks represent what was
going on in that thread during
a point in time in the past.
Thread viewer checks every
20 milliseconds to see what's
going on in the thread.
The green blocks, such as this one,
let me turn on the demo mode
to make this a little easier.
Display in large demo mode.
There we go.
The large blocks, or the green blocks,
represent that the thread when
ThreadViewer checked had been
actually executing at that point.
And when we actually click on it,
we get a backtrace illustrating
exactly what code was executing
in hopes of giving us some idea
of what the application was doing.
The yellow blocks indicate that when
ThreadViewer stopped the program,
nothing was happening.
The thread was waiting.
However, the thread had been running
since the last time it checked.
So this indicates some
execution had been occurring.
The dark green blocks indicate
that we were running in the kernel.
that the thread was actually running,
but it was running down in the kernel.
And that usually implies that we were
doing things like accessing the disk,
for example,
where it could be a long running or
where it's actually a task that's
blocking and the application has to wait
for the kernel to come back with data.
Then the pastel colors
tend to represent waiting.
The green, for example, represents you're
sitting in the wait loop.
You can tell from the stack backtrace
here that the CFRUNLOOPRUN call
happens to be in the backtrace,
and the thread is actually
waiting on the Mach message call.
It's just sent off a message to the
Windows server saying let me know
when something actually happens,
and it's waiting for the response.
And then other colors such as red
indicates waiting on a semaphore.
So what we see here is that the
thread-- or is that the finder is
actually using multiple threads.
As with most of the
applications with GUIs,
you have one main thread,
which tends to have most
of the drawing code on it.
And so this is the thread where
you want to do all the activity
for doing the direct manipulation,
for moving things around,
for resizing windows and the like.
And that thread tends to have a
fair amount of activity on it.
The other threads are a
little more interesting,
though.
For example,
here we found that every time
that we opened a new folder
that we'd never seen before,
A new thread's created.
And the reason for that is
that when we open a folder,
or when we go to a folder
that we've seen before,
the finder actually goes off and
queries that directory to find out what
the files are that are inside of it.
Excuse me?
And so what happens is the finder
actually spawns off this thread.
The thread then goes off
and it asks the disk,
what are the files in that directory?
And because that operation may block,
the finder wants to make sure it
actually is on a separate thread so
that if we're going off an iDisk,
let's say,
where it might take a long time
for that to actually come back,
this is not going to block
the main thread and cause the
user interface to hang on us.
This also happens when we go
into a directory after we've
done it for the first time,
because the contents of that
directory may have changed
since the last time we looked.
And so the thread can actually
go off and gather the data.
There's actually a second thread,
which we can see was doing
activity about the same time that
each of those threads was formed.
The Finder team calls
this the Sync Thread.
And that actually is the thread that
maintains the database of information
on folders that we've already opened.
And so the Sync Thread is actually
responsible for spawning the
threads to gather information
and also update the database,
which the main thread can then
actually query to find out what the
contents of a given directory are.
This is a second reason to use threading,
the idea of separating out the logic
of dealing with the database of
current file contents from the idea of
dealing with the UI or from the idea of
actually querying the data on the disk.
And so having the Sync Thread
actually logically separates things.
So that's the second reason we
actually wanted to use threading.
Let's imagine we do a duplicate.
So go up to the finder and do duplicate.
We see a relatively long-running app.
And we see that there
are two threads spawned,
and in fact,
both have lots of dark green blocks,
which indicate we're
doing a lot of blocking,
waiting for the file system to do work.
Now, when we're doing a copy... Actually,
let's let this continue.
When we're doing a copy,
this is an activity that probably
we want to do in the background.
We don't want the user interface to hang
while we wait for the copy to finish.
and therefore the finder actually
spawns this off on separate
threads as a background activity,
puts up a dialog box to let
us know what's going on,
and we can continue to do work while
the copy goes on in the background.
Now,
one of the things you may be asking is,
well, why were two threads spawned?
We only were doing one copy.
So one of the other reasons that you
may want to use threading is the idea of
being able to do operations in parallel.
So if we're doing a copy from, let's say,
a single disk,
copying from one place to another,
every time that we do a read,
we have to do a write.
And because those are
going to be sequential,
we have to do read, then write,
then read, then write.
However, if we end up copying from
one volume to another,
we have an opportunity for parallelism.
Because as we're writing each block,
we can start reading the
next block off of the disk.
And we can do those in parallel because
they're dealing with different devices.
And so the finder actually uses
two threads so that as block,
let's say block n is
being written to disk,
block n plus one can be read
into memory at the same time.
And this can double throughput.
And the same approach of using two
threads is used for all the copies
to make sure that it solves that case
and because there's no particular
inefficiency in not using it.
Now, one of the other issues that
the Finder team ran into is
the issue of legacy code.
How many of you actually have
code that you didn't write or
that you're responsible for
and you don't quite understand?
Oh, good.
So one of the issues that some of
the teams that use Mac OS X have
internally is that some of
the frameworks that we use,
some of the bits of library code,
have been inherited from Mac OS 9,
which were inherited from Mac OS 8,
which were inherited from and so on.
And, in fact,
there were some parts of the system that
actually ended up being...were written
without thinking about multi-threading,
that multiple people might actually be
trying to use the APIs at the same time.
And one of the problems that
the Finder team actually had
was the issue of icon services,
which is the part of the code
that actually goes off and
gets resources out of files,
gets icons and the like.
And, in fact,
they ran into some interesting
problems on 10.0 and 10.1,
where they had to do the accesses to
the icon services on the main thread,
because they couldn't guarantee
that there weren't two things
trying to do it at the same time.
and as a result,
many of those operations ended up being
done on the main thread and blocking.
This is actually one of the things
I believe they're fixing for 10.2,
that they've actually got a
better way to deal with the icons.
But this introduces the
question of even with,
even when you have an application that
may be very good for multithreading,
you may run into issues where there's
blocks of code that you can't actually
multithread because they weren't
designed for this and you can't
actually do multiple access to them.
And so this is something to keep
in mind as you look at code and as
you look at multithreading issues,
if there's going to be issues
trying to deal with things
that shouldn't be threaded.
Okay, so that's the finder example.
Okay, the second example I'm going
to do is the QuickTime Player.
And to be self-referential,
what I'm going to use as a
demo is last year's movie.
So, let's see what's going
on in QuickTime Player.
Let's again run ThreadViewer.
We'll attach to the QuickTime Player.
And we see that multiple
threads are running.
Okay, so what's going on here?
And if we actually stop the program...
Actually,
I'm not going to stop at BS--well,
we'll try it.
We'll see what happens.
We can get some ideas
about what's going on.
Once again, the main thread, thread zero,
is where all the drawing goes on.
and where all the user interface happens.
So if we're doing resizes,
if we're clicking around on buttons,
that's where the activity goes on.
The rest of the threads
are actually created by the
QuickTime libraries themselves.
If we actually let this run,
eventually we're going to see some
disk accesses on one of the threads.
There's going to be occasional
green blocks as QuickTime goes
off and gets data.
So as with Finder,
the QuickTime code actually wants
to make sure that when it goes
out to get files off of disk,
that it doesn't block,
that it doesn't cause the
user interface to hang waiting
for those blocks to come in.
And so the QuickTime thread for
getting the data can actually
grab large blocks of data,
can copy them in,
and doesn't have to worry about
what happens if that blocks.
There goes one.
Yes, read.
There's a second thread that tends
to be doing a lot of activity,
probably the top one,
that actually represents
the decompression algorithm.
So that's actually being
run on a separate thread,
which follows the idea of trying
to separate different tasks on
different threads just to make it
easier to reason about the program.
And then finally,
when the data is decompressed and
it's being sent to the screen or
being sent to the audio device,
rather than taking large chunks
of data as we did with the disk,
the audio device probably wants very
small bits of data and wants to send
them to the audio device as quickly
as possible to minimize latency.
And so the writing to the audio device...
Let's see if we can actually find that.
Actually, here we are.
Code in the I/O thread.
This is probably actually the
thread that's doing the audio data.
That actually ends up being on
a separate thread so that it can
keep up its real-time behavior.
A final thing to notice about this
version of Thread Viewer that is on
the May 2002 developer CD is that not
only do we have a thread identifier,
but we also have this little
set of letters and parentheses.
That actually represents the scheduling
algorithm for each of the threads.
With the finder, we saw TS,
which stands for basically
a time-sharing thread,
which runs whenever the
kernel gives it a chance to.
If it runs too much,
then the kernel bumps down its priority
and gives somebody else a chance,
and so on.
The other threads are what
are called round robin.
They're sort of a real-time thread.
In this case,
what ends up happening is that
when you create the thread,
you actually say,
"I need 20 milliseconds every
second to do my work." The kernel
tries to schedule that time.
For the real-time nature of this,
for dealing with the media,
having those have some sort of real-time
guarantee is actually a good thing.
Now,
the times when I actually put this in,
the folks on the kernel who deal
with scheduling were a little aghast
because they were afraid that we
would all go off and immediately
make our threads high priority to
try to get as much CPU as possible.
This is a very bad idea because the
system's been designed so that the
things that actually need the time should
be running as high-priority threads.
And if you start running
your stuff at high priority,
if you decide that maybe you want your
user interface running with round robin,
you can actually run into some
cases where you might have priority
inversions where you end up
deadlocking other parts of the system.
Or, worse yet,
you might be a bad citizen.
So let's imagine your application's
running and you've somehow set it up
so that it's using extra priority.
Then somebody comes along and says, "Oh,
I want to burn a CD in iTunes."
Well, the CD device actually has some
relatively strict scheduling that
has to be done to make sure that
data actually gets out to the device.
And there are actually times
on DVDs where if you don't
get that data just right,
you can actually mess up disks and
corrupt them in ways so that you
basically have a piece of plastic.
So as a result,
you want to be very careful about how you
might actually use scheduling so that you
don't cause people to generate bad DVDs.
So there are different ways that
you can actually schedule things
that are known to be real time.
Use them extremely sparingly.
So that's my example for today.
Hopefully that gives you some ideas
about how you might actually use
threading in your own applications and
how Apple actually uses it in theirs.
Thank you.
Thank you, Robert.
So let's give you a roadmap.
Go back to the podium.
So a couple -- obviously
since this is Thursday,
some of these sessions
have already occurred.
But for those of you who will
be looking back either through
the website or through the DVDs,
these are some of the sessions to
look at for performance optimization.
Who to contact?
Matt Watson has been kind
enough to provide his own email,
so he's available and
myself also available.
From time to time,
I do hold kitchens for performance
optimization or specifically
for MP or threading kitchens.
So if those are things
that might interest you,
if you need more assistance,
please contact me.
I'd be happy to work with you
to set up a schedule for that.
Some more areas for documentation,
the Carbon thread links and
Cocoa threads and all of these URLs are
available at the main URL site that
is being provided for the conference.
Some more tech doc notes.
So again,
the takeaway from today's session
is threads can work for you.
They can also work against you.
So use them where it makes sense.
Use them where the user
experience will be enhanced.
Threads don't necessarily mean
that you have to have a dual
processor to take advantage of them.
They will assist you in that case when
you do have a dual processor system.
But as Robert showed you in his examples,
these could be applications that
are taking advantage of the fact
that they need to read and write
on a single processor machine.
So with that, I'd like to start the Q&A.